.. _unique-identifier:
.. meta::
	:description:
		Unique Identifier: A unique identifier is a value that distinguishes one entity from all others within a given scope.
	:twitter:card: summary_large_image
	:twitter:site: @exakat
	:twitter:title: Unique Identifier
	:twitter:description: Unique Identifier: A unique identifier is a value that distinguishes one entity from all others within a given scope
	:twitter:creator: @exakat
	:twitter:image:src: https://php-dictionary.readthedocs.io/en/latest/_static/logo.png
	:og:image: https://php-dictionary.readthedocs.io/en/latest/_static/logo.png
	:og:title: Unique Identifier
	:og:type: article
	:og:description: A unique identifier is a value that distinguishes one entity from all others within a given scope
	:og:url: https://php-dictionary.readthedocs.io/en/latest/dictionary/unique-identifier.ini.html
	:og:locale: en
.. raw:: html

	<script type="application/ld+json">{"@context":"https:\/\/schema.org","@graph":[{"@type":"WebPage","@id":"https:\/\/php-dictionary.readthedocs.io\/en\/latest\/tips\/Uninitialized string offset.html","url":"https:\/\/php-dictionary.readthedocs.io\/en\/latest\/tips\/Uninitialized string offset.html","name":"Unique Identifier","isPartOf":{"@id":"https:\/\/www.exakat.io\/"},"datePublished":"Mon, 15 Jun 2026 11:03:59 +0000","dateModified":"Mon, 15 Jun 2026 11:03:59 +0000","description":"A unique identifier is a value that distinguishes one entity from all others within a given scope","inLanguage":"en-US","potentialAction":[{"@type":"ReadAction","target":["https:\/\/php-dictionary.readthedocs.io\/en\/latest\/dictionary\/Unique Identifier.html"]}]},{"@type":"WebSite","@id":"https:\/\/www.exakat.io\/","url":"https:\/\/www.exakat.io\/","name":"Exakat","description":"Smart PHP static analysis","inLanguage":"en-US"}]}</script>


Unique Identifier
-----------------

A unique identifier is a value that distinguishes one entity from all others within a given scope. Its uniqueness may be guaranteed within a single database table, across a distributed system, or globally.

Common forms of unique identifiers include:

+ Auto-increment integers: simple, sequential, generated by a database engine.
+ UUID (Universally Unique Identifier): 128-bit values generated without central coordination.
+ ULID (Universally Unique Lexicographically Sortable Identifier): UUID-compatible but lexicographically sortable.
+ Slug: a human-readable, URL-friendly string derived from a title or label.

The choice of identifier affects indexing performance, URL exposure, privacy (auto-increment IDs reveal record counts), and the ability to generate identifiers outside the database.

In PHP, ``uniqid()`` generates a time-based string, while UUID generation is provided by libraries such as ``ramsey/uuid``.

.. code-block:: php
   
   <?php
   
       // built-in, not guaranteed to be globally unique
       $id = uniqid('', true);
   
       // UUID via ramsey/uuid
       use Ramsey\Uuid\Uuid;
       $uuid = Uuid::uuid4()->toString();
       // e.g. 550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000
   
   ?>


`Documentation <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unique_identifier>`__

See also `ULID specification <https://github.com/ulid/spec>`_.

Related : :ref:`Universally Unique IDentifier (UUID) <uuid>`, :ref:`Slug <slug>`, :ref:`Database <database>`, :ref:`Identifier <identifier>`, :ref:`Race Condition <race-condition>`

Related packages : `ramsey/uuid <https://packagist.org/packages/ramsey/uuid>`_
